While Bhakti Yoga and Dvaita Vedanta are the prominent teachings, states T. S. Rukmani, various passages show a synthesis that also includes Samkhya, Yoga, Vedanta, and Advaita Vedanta.[74]

Bhakti
Main articles: Bhakti and Bhakti yoga
Cutler states the Bhagavata Purana is among the most important texts on bhakti, presenting a fully developed teaching that originated with the Bhagavad Gita.[75] Bryant states that while classical yoga attempts to shut down the mind and senses, Bhakti Yoga in the Bhagavata teaches that the mind is transformed by filling it with thoughts of Krishna.[76]

Matchett states that in addition to various didactic philosophical passages the Bhagavata also describes one of the activities that can lead to liberation (moksha) as listening to, reflecting on the stories of, and sharing devotion for Krishna with others.[77] Bhakti is depicted in the Purana, adds Matchett, as both an overpowering emotion as well as a way of life that is rational and deliberately cultivated.[78]

Samkhya

Kapila Muni.
Main article: Samkhya
Surendranath Dasgupta describes the theistic Samkhya philosophy taught by Kapila in the Bhagavata as the dominant philosophy in the text.[79]

Sheridan points out that in the Third Canto, Kapila is described as an avatar of Vishnu, born as the son of the Prajapati Kardama, in order to share the knowledge of self-realization and liberation with his mother, Devahuti; in the Eleventh Canto, Krishna also teaches Samkhya to Uddhava, describing the world as an illusion, and the individual as dreaming, even while in the waking state. Krishna expounds Samhkhya and Yoga as the way of overcoming the dream, with the goal being Krishna Himself.[80]

Sheridan also states that the treatment of Samkhya in the Bhagavata is also changed by its emphasis on devotion, as does Dasgupta, adding it is somewhat different from other classical Samkhya texts.[81][80]

Advaita

Sringeri Sharada Peetham is one of the Hindu Advaita Vedanta matha or monastery established by Adi Shankara.
Main article: Advaita Vedanta
Kumar Das and Sheridan state that the Bhagavata frequently discusses a distinctly advaitic or non-dualistic philosophy of Shankara.[5][82] Rukmani adds that the concept of moksha is explained as Ekatva (Oneness) and Sayujya (Absorption, intimate union), wherein one is completely lost in Brahman (Self, Supreme Being, one's true nature).[74] This, states Rukmani, is proclamation of a 'return of the individual soul to the Absolute and its merging into the Absolute', which is unmistakably advaitic.[74] The Bhagavata Purana is also stated to parallel the non-duality of Adi Shankara by Sheridan.[82] As an example:

The aim of life is inquiry into the Truth, and not the desire for enjoyment in heaven by performing religious rites,
Those who possess the knowledge of the Truth, call the knowledge of non-duality as the Truth,
It is called Brahman, the Highest Self, and Bhagavan.

— Sūta, Bhagavata Purana 1.2.10–11, Translated by Daniel Sheridan[83]
Scholars describe this philosophy as built on the foundation of non-dualism in the Upanishads, and term it as "Advaitic Theism".[82][84] This term combines the seemingly contradictory beliefs of a personal God that can be worshiped with a God that is immanent in creation and in one's own self. God in this philosophy is within and is not different from the individual self, states Sheridan, and transcends the limitations of specificity and temporality. Sheridan also describes Advaitic Theism as a "both/and" solution for the questions of whether God is transcendent or immanent, and credits the Bhāgavata with a 'truly creative religious moment' for introducing this philosophy.[82] The text suggests that God Vishnu and the soul (atman) in all beings is one in quality (nirguna).

Bryant states that the monism in Bhagavata Purana is certainly built on Vedanta foundations, but not exactly the same as the monism of Adi Shankara.[85] The Bhagavata asserts, according to Bryant, that the empirical and the spiritual universe are both metaphysical realities, and manifestations of the same Oneness, just like heat and light are "real but different" manifestations of sunlight.[85] Bryant notes that the tenth book of the Bhagavata does not, as is conventional for non-dualist schools, understand Krishna's form to be a "secondary derivation," which can be subsumed within the impersonal absolute. Rather than describe Brahman to be ultimately formless, the tenth book ascribes an "eternal personal element" to Brahman.[86]

Dharma

The Dharma wheel.
Main article: Dharma
Kurmas Das states the Bhagavata Purana conceptualizes a form of Dharma that competes with that of the Vedas, suggesting that Bhakti ultimately leads to Self-knowledge, Moksha (salvation) and bliss.[87] The earliest mention of bhakti is found in the Shvetashvatara Upanishad verse 6.23,[88][89] but scholars such as Max Muller state that the word Bhakti appears only once in this Upanishad; and that being in one last verse of the epilogue it could be a later addition, and that the context suggests that it is a panentheistic idea and not theistic.[90][91]

Scholarly consensus sees bhakti as a post-Vedic movement that developed primarily during the Puranas era of Indian history.[92] The Bhagavata Purana develops the Bhakti concept more elaborately, states Cutler,[93] proposing "worship without ulterior motive and with kind disposition towards all" as Dharma.[94][95] T.R. Sharma states the text includes in its scope intellectual and emotional devotion as well as Advaita Vedanta ideas.[96]

The text does not subscribe, states Gupta and Valpey, to context-less "categorical notions of justice or morality", but suggests that "Dharma depends on context".[97] They add that in a positive or neutral context, ethics and moral behavior must be adhered to; and when persistently persecuted by evil, anything that reduces the strength of the "evil and poisonous circumstances" is good.[97] That which is motivated by, furthers, and enables bhakti is the golden standard of Dharma.[97]

Yoga
Main article: Yoga
Sarma states that the Bhagavata Purana describes all steps of yoga practice, and characterizes yoga as bhakti, asserting that the most important aspect is the spiritual goal.[98] According to Sarma and Rukmani, the text dedicates numerous chapters to yoga, such as Canto 10 (chapter 11), which begins with a declaration that Siddhi results from concentrating one's mind on Krishna, adding this substitutes the concept of a "personal god" in the Yogasutras of Patanjali, and contrasts with Patanjali's view that Siddhi is considered powerful but an obstacle to Samadhi.[98][99]

In other chapters of the text, Rukmani states, Śuka describes different meditations on aspects of Krishna, in a way that is similar to the Yoga Sutras of Patanjali.[74] However, adds Bryant, the Bhagavata Purana recommends the object of concentration as Krishna, thus folding in yoga as a form of bhakti and the "union with the divine".[74][100] Bryant describes the synthesis of ideas in Bhagavata Purana as:

The philosophy of the Bhagavata is a mixture of Vedanta terminology, Samkhyan metaphysics and devotionalized Yoga praxis. (...) The tenth book promotes Krishna as the highest absolute personal aspect of godhead – the personality behind the term Ishvara and the ultimate aspect of Brahman.

— Edwin Bryant, Krishna: A Sourcebook[101]
Sheridan as well as Pintchman affirm Bryant's view, adding that the Vedantic view emphasized in the Bhagavata is non-dualist, as described within a reality of plural forms.[102][103]

Maya
In Vedanta, Maya is frequently depicted as a deceptive or deluding energy. Conversely, the Bhagavata Purana presents Maya as divine energy through which Krishna manifests the material universe, including its elements, universes, bodies, senses, and minds, contributing to the richness and diversity of the phenomenal world. This process is not just entrapment but also a path to liberation for beings caught in the cycle of birth and death. Maya's illusionary powers, though binding individuals to temporal existence, ultimately facilitate their spiritual growth and release.[104]

Suffering
In explaining suffering, the Bhagavata Purana acknowledges karma as a central principle, where actions in past lives influence current and future existences, shaping one's destiny and experiences in subsequent lifetimes. However, it also critiques the adequacy of karma in fully explaining suffering and explores time (kala) as a significant factor in suffering. Time, personified by Sudarshana Chakra, is shown as an unstoppable force that brings both end and renewal, acting indiscriminately upon all beings. Despite time's overwhelming power, the text suggests that sincere devotion (bhakti) to God and surrender to the divine can enable devout souls to overcome the influence of time and karma, ultimately leading to spiritual liberation (moksha).[105]

Lila
The Bhagavata Purana argues that the play of God (lila) is central to understanding his actions in the world. Despite having everything and being able to make his wishes reality, Krishna engages in various activities and interactions with devotees out of joy and divine play, rather than out of any necessity or compulsion (SB 1.10.24). By participating in Krishna's lila, individuals can transcend the limitations and suffering of the material world and ultimately achieve liberation from time's constraints.[106]

Significance
The source of many popular stories of Krishna's pastimes for centuries in the Indian subcontinent,[6] the Bhagavata Purana is widely recognized as the best-known and most influential of the Puranas, and as a part of Vedic literature (the Puranas, Itihasa epics, and Upanishads) is referred to as the "Fifth Veda".[107][108][109] It is important in Indian religious literature for its emphasis on the practice of devotion compared to the more theoretical approach of the Bhagavad Gita, for challenging the ritualism of the Vedas, and for its extended description of a God in human form.[5]

The Srimad Bhagavatam is the very essence of all the Vedanta literature. One who has enjoyed the nectar of its rasa never has any desire for anything else.

— Bhagavata Purana 12.13.15, Translated by David Haberman[110]
Relation to other texts
The Bhagavata Purana aligns itself with canonical texts like Brahma Sutras and Rigveda by echoing their verses at various points throughout its narrative. It claims equality with the Vedas and reinterprets their themes to emphasize the supremacy of Krishna. It transforms the descriptions of Vishnu's deeds found in the Vishnu Sukta into narratives centered around Krishna's actions (verse 10.51.38). The Bhagavata Purana does not directly reference the Bhagavad Gita, which is part of the Mahabharata. Instead, it includes the teachings similar to those found in the Bhagavad Gita in the form of dialogues between Krishna and Uddhava in Canto 11.[111]

Hindu Festivals
The stories in the Bhagavata Purana are also the legends quoted by one generation to the next in Vaishnavism, during annual festivals such as Holi and Diwali.[112][113]

The International Society for Krishna Consciousness (ISKCON) celebrates the promise of Canto 12, Chapter 13, Verse 13 by distributing sets of Srimad Bhagavatam leading up to the full-moon day of the month of Bhādra (Bhādra Purnima) in India and around the world.[114]

Vaishnavism

Chaitanya (1486–1534 CE)
Gaudiya Vaishnavism
Main articles: Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, Gauranga, and Gaudiya Vaishnavism
The Bhagavata has played a significant role in the emergence of the Krishna-bhakti (Gaudiya Vaishnavism) movement of Chaitanya (1486–1534 CE), in Bengal.[115] The scriptural basis for the belief that Chaitanya is an avatar of Krishna is found in verses such as the following (Disciples of Swami Prabhupada translation):

In the Age of Kali, intelligent persons perform congregational chanting to worship the incarnation of Godhead who constantly sings the names of Kṛṣṇa. Although His complexion is not blackish, He is Kṛṣṇa Himself. He is accompanied by His associates, servants, weapons and confidential companions.

— Canto 11, Chapter 5, Verse 32[116]
Chaitanya is commonly referred to as 'Gauranga' in regards to His golden complexion (as detailed in the Gauranga article, the Sanskrit word 'ākṛṣṇaṁ' means 'not blackish' and 'golden'), and is most notable for popularising the Hare Krishna maha-mantra. In regards to not being explicitly named as an avatar (unlike others such as Kalki) in the Bhagavata, this is also explained (A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada translation):

In this way, my Lord, You appear in various incarnations as a human being, an animal, a great saint, a demigod, a fish or a tortoise, thus maintaining the entire creation in different planetary systems and killing the demoniac principles. According to the age, O my Lord, You protect the principles of religion. In the Age of Kali, however, You do not assert Yourself as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and therefore You are known as Triyuga, or the Lord who appears in three yugas.

— Canto 7, Chapter 9, Verse 38[117]
The key word in this verse in regards to Krishna incarnating in the age of Kali Yuga is 'channaḥ' (Sanskrit छन्न), which means ' hidden', 'secret', or 'disguised'.[118] In Gaudiya Vaishnavism, Chaitanya is accepted as a hidden avatar of Krishna who appeared in the age of Kali (also known as 'the Iron Age' and 'the age of quarrel') as His own devotee to show the easiest way to achieve Krishna Consciousness.[119] Modern Gaudiya movements such as the Gaudiya Math (established by Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati in 1920) and others established by disciples of Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati, such as the International Society for Krishna Consciousness (by A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada in 1966) and the Sri Chaitanya Saraswat Math (by Bhakti Rakshak Sridhar in 1941), trace their disciplic lineages back directly to Lord Chaitanya.

Other Vaishnava Traditions
In the 15th–16th century Ekasarana Dharma in Assam, a panentheistic tradition whose proponents, Sankardeva and Madhavdeva, acknowledge that their theological positions are rooted in the Bhagavata Purana,[120] purged of doctrines that find no place in Assamese Vaishnavism[121] and adding a monist commentary instead.[122]

In northern and western India the Bhagavata Purana has influenced the Hari Bhakti Vilasa and Haveli-style Krishna temples found in Braj region near Mathura-Vrindavan.[123] The text complements the Pancharatra Agama texts of Vaishnavism.[123] While the text focuses on Krishna "Lord Narayana (Vishnu) himself appears and explains how Brahma and Shiva should never be seen as independent and different from him".[124] The sixth book includes the feminine principle as Shakti, or goddess Devi, conceptualizing her as the "energy and creative power" of the masculine yet a manifestation of a sexless Brahman, presented in a language suffused with Hindu monism.[102]

Jainism and Buddhism
The fifth canto of the Bhagavata Purana is significant for its inclusion of legends about the first Tirthankara of Jainism, Rishabha, as an avatar of Vishnu.[125] Further, his father Nabhi is mentioned as one of the Manus and his mother Marudevi also finds a mention. It further mentions the 100 sons of Rishabha including Bharata.[126] While homage to Shakyamuni Buddha is included in by declaring him as an avatar of Vishnu,[127] the interpretation of Buddhism-related stories in the Purana range from honor to ambivalence to polemics wherein prophecies predict some will distort and misrepresent the teachings of the Vedas, and attempt to sow confusion.[128][129][130] According to T. S. Rukmani, the Bhagavata Purana is also significant in asserting that Yoga practice is a form of Bhakti.[131]

The Arts


The Bhagavata Purana was a significant text in the bhakti movement and the culture of India.[132] Dance and theatre arts such as Kathakali (left), Kuchipudi (middle) and Odissi (right) portray legends from the Purana.[133][134]
The Bhagavata Purana played a key role in the history of Indian theatre, music, and dance, particularly through the tradition of Ras Leela. These are dramatic enactments about Krishna's pastimes. Some of the text's legends have inspired secondary theatre literature such as the eroticism in Gita Govinda.[135] While Indian dance and music theatre traces its origins to the ancient Sama Veda and Natyasastra texts,[136][137] the Bhagavata Purana and other Krishna-related texts such as Harivamsa and Vishnu Purana have inspired numerous choreographic themes.[138]

Many 'Ras' plays dramatise episodes related in the Rasa Panchadhyayi ("Five chapters of the Celestial Dance"; Canto 10, Chapters 29–33) of the Bhagavatam.[139] The Bhagavatam also encourages theatrical performance as a means to propagate the faith (BP 11.11.23 and 36, 11.27.35 and 44, etc.), and this has led to the emergence of several theatrical forms centred on Krishna all across India.[140] Canto 10 of Bhagavatam is regarded as the inspiration for many classical dance styles such as Kathak, Odissi, Manipuri and Bharatnatyam.[141] Bryant summarizes the influence as follows,

The Bhagavata ranks as an outstanding product of Sanskrit literature. Perhaps more significantly, the Bhagavata has inspired more derivative literature, poetry, drama, dance, theatre and art than any other text in the history of Sanskrit literature, with the possible exception of the Ramayana.

— Edwin Bryant, Krishna: A Sourcebook[142]


Modern reception
In the 20th century, the Bhagavata Purana became widely popular as it spread beyond India, translated into over twenty languages and respected by people worldwide.[143]

Bhaktivedanta Swami
Bhaktivedanta Swami significantly impacted the global recognition of the Bhagavata Purana. Bhaktivedanta Swami, raised in a devout Vaishnava family, embraced the Caitanya tradition in 1932. Between 1962 and 1965, he devoted himself to translating the Bhagavata Purana into English, a departure from earlier works focusing on Caitanya's life and teachings.[144] While lacking formal traditional education, he was deeply familiar with the teachings of Caitanya and the insights of ancient commentators through self-study. He made the Bhagavata Purana meaningful to modern readers, and his way of explaining the text made it easier to understand and relevant to modern world. He appealed to young people who were looking for something different from mainstream religion.[145]

Commentaries and translations
Commentaries
The Bhagavata Purana is one of the most commented texts in Indian literature. There is a saying in Sanskrit – vidyā bhāgavatāvadhi – Bhāgavatam is the limit of one's learning. Hence throughout the centuries it attracted a host of commentators from all schools of Krishna worshippers. Over eighty medieval era Bhāṣya (scholarly reviews and commentaries) in Sanskrit alone are known, and many more commentaries exist in various Indian languages.[3] The oldest exegetical commentary presently known is Tantra-Bhagavata from the Pancaratra school. Other commentaries include:

Advaita Vedanta commentaries
Bhāvārtha-dīpikā by Śrīdhara Svāmī (15th century CE).[146][147] According to Ravi M. Gupta, this commentary "exerted extraordinary influence on later Bhāgavata commentaries, and indeed, on Vaiṣṇava traditions more generally." This influence is "particularly true of the Caitanya Vaiṣṇava commentaries by Sanātana Gosvāmi, Jīva Gosvāmī, Viśvanātha Cakravartī, and others."[147]
Amṛta-taraṅginī by Lakṣmīdhara (15th century CE)[148]
A commentary by Madhusūdana Sarasvatī (c. 1540–1640) on the first verse of the Bhāgavata Purāṇa.
Acintya-bhedābheda Commentaries
Caitanya-mata-mañjuṣā – Śrīnātha Cakravartī
Bṛhad-vaiṣṇava-toṣiṇī – Sanātana Gosvāmī
Laghu-Vaiṣṇava-toṣiṇī – Jīva Gosvāmī
Krama-sandarbha – Jīva Gosvāmī
Bṛhat-krama-sandarbha – Jīva Gosvāmī (attributed)
Ṣaṭ-sandarbhas by Jīva Gosvāmī (16th century CE)[149]
Sārārtha-darśinī – Viśvanātha Cakravartī (17th century CE) – elaborate commentary
Vaiṣṇavānandinī – Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa
Dīpika-dīpanī – Rādhāramaṇa Gosvāmī
Gauḍīya-bhāṣya – Bhaktisiddhanta Saraswati (20th century CE) – elaborate commentary
Bhaktivedānta Purports – A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada (20th century CE) – elaborate commentary
Dvaita commentaries
Bhāgavata Tātparya Nirṇaya by Madhvacharya (13th century CE)
Pada-ratnavali by Vijayadhvaja Tīrtha (15th century CE) – elaborate commentary
Bhagvata Tatparya Nirnaya Tippani by Yadupati Acharya (16th century)
Duraghatabhavadipa by Satyabhinava Tirtha (17th century CE)
Bhaghavata-Sarodhara by Adavi Jayatirthacharya (18th century CE)
Srimadbhagavata Tippani by Satyadharma Tirtha (18th century CE)
Dvaitādvaita Commentaries
Siddhānta pradīpikā – Śuka-sudhī (Early 19th Century)
Suddhādvaita Commentaries
Subodhinī by Vallabha (incomplete — present on the First, Second, Third, Tenth Cantos and partially on the Eleventh Canto)
Bhāgavatārtha-prakaraṇa by Vallabha
Daśama-skandha anukramaṇikā by Vallabha
Ṭippaṇī – Gosvāmī Viṭṭhalanātha
Subodhinī-prakāśa – Gosvāmī Puruṣhottama
Bāla-prabodhinī – Gosvāmī Giridharlāl
Viśuddha-rasa-dīpikā – Kishorī Prasāda
Viśiṣṭādvaita Commentaries
Śuka pakṣīyā – Sudarśana sūri (alias Vyāsa Bhaṭṭa)
Bhāgavata-candrikā – Vīrarāghava (14th century CE) – elaborate commentary
Bhakta-rañjanī – Bhagavat prasāda
Others
Hanumad-bhāṣya
Vāsanā-bhāṣya
Sambandhokti
Vidvat-kāmadhenu
Paramahaṁsa-priyā
Śuka-hṛdaya
Muktā-phala and Hari-līlāmṛta by Vopadeva
Bhakti-ratnāvali by Viṣṇupurī
Bhakti-ratnākara by Srimanta Sankardev
Ekanathi Bhagavata by Saint Eknath of Paithan (16th century CE, on the 11th Canto in the vernacular language of the Indian state of Maharashtra)
Narayaneeyam by Melpathur Bhattathiri of Kerala (1586, a condensed Srimad Bhagavatam)
Bhāvārtha-dīpikā-prakāśa – Vaṁśīdhara
Anvitārtha prakāśikā – Gaṅgāsahāya
Bhagavata-Purana by S.S. Shulba (2017, original Sanskrit);[150] other Sanskrit manuscripts are available
A study of the Bhagavata Purana or Esoteric Hinduism by P.N. Sinha (1901)[151]
Translations
The Bhagavata has been rendered into various Indian and non-Indian languages. A version of it is available in almost every Indian language, with forty translations alone in the Bengali language.[3] From the eighteenth century onwards, the text became the subject of scholarly interest and Victorian disapproval,[142] with the publication of a French translation followed by an English one. The following is a partial list of translations:

Assamese
Bhagavata of Sankara (1449–1568 CE, primary theological source for Mahapurushiya Dharma in the Indian state of Assam)[152][153][154]
Katha Bhagavata by Bhattadeva (Prose translation 16th century CE)
Bengali
Śrī Kṛṣṇa-vijaya by Maladhara Basu, a translation of the 10th Canto and a bit from others
Kṛṣṇa-prema-taraṅginī by Śrī Raghunātha Bhāgavatācārya (15th Century CE)
Hindi
Bhagavata Mahapurana published by Gita Press (2017)
Kannada
Bhagavata Padaratnavali with kannada translation by Dr. Vyasanakere Prabhanjanachar
Bhagavata Saroddhara by VishnuTeertharu (Adavi JayatirthaCharyaru) with Kannada translation by Dr. Vyasanakere Prabhanjanachar
Bhagavata Mahatmya in PadmaPurana in Kannada Pravachana by Dr. Vyasanakere Prabhanjanachar
Bhagavata Mahapurana by Vidwan Motaganahalli Ramashesha Sastri (foreword by historian S. Srikanta Sastri)[155]
Odia

Odia Bhagabata by Jagannatha Dasa (15th Century CE)
Telugu
Mahābhāgavatamu by the poet Bammera Pōtana (15th century CE).[156]
English
The Śrīmad Bhāgavatam by A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada (1970–77, includes transliterations, synonyms, and purports). Swami Prabhupada completed cantos 1 through 9 and the first thirteen chapters of canto 10 before he died. After his departure, a team of his disciples completed the work, which was then published by the Bhaktivedenta Book Trust.
A prose English translation of Shrimadbhagabatam by M.N. Dutt (1895, unabridged)[157]
Bhagavata Purana by Motilal Banarsidass Publishers (1950, unabridged)[158]
The Srimad Bhagavatam by J.M. Sanyal (1970, abridged)
The Bhagavata Purana by Ganesh Vasudeo Tagare (1976, unabridged)[156]
Srimad Bhagavata by Swami Tapasyananda (1980, unabridged)
A Translation by B.P. Yati Maharaj of Mayapur Sri Chaitanya Math
Reading from Bhagabata by Gananath Das which has been translated from Odia Bhagabata
Bhagavata Mahapurana by C.L. Goswami and M.A. Shastri (2006, unabridged, Gita Press)[156][159]
Śrīmad Bhāgavatam with the Sārārtha-darśinī commentary of Viśvanātha Cakravartī by Swami Bhānu (2010)
Srimad Bhagavata Purana by Anand Aadhar (2012)[160]
The Bhagavata Purana by Bibek Debroy (2019, unabridged)
English (partial translations and paraphrases)
Kṛṣṇa: The Supreme Personality of Godhead by A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada (part translation, condensed version: summary study and paraphrase of Canto 10)[156]
Vallabhacarya on the Love Games of Krishna by James D. Redington (English translation of Vallabha's commentary on the Rāsa-Panchyādhyāyi)
The Bhagavata Purana; Book X by Nandini Nopani and P. Lal (1997)
Krishna: The Beautiful Legend of God: Srimad Bhagavata Purana Book X by Edwin F. Bryant (2004)[161]
The Wisdom of God: Srimat Bhagavatam by Swami Prabhavananda (part translation, part summary and paraphrase)
The Uddhava Gita by Swami Ambikananda Saraswati (2000, prose translation of Canto 11)
Bhagavata Purana by Ramesh Menon (2007, a 'retelling' based on other translations)
Śrīmad Bhāgavatam: A Symphony of Commentaries on the Tenth Canto in six volumes (covering chapters 1-33) by Gaurapada Dāsa, M.A. (translator) & Matsya Avatāra Dāsa (editor) (2016-2018)
Bhakti Yoga: Tales and Teachings from the Bhagavata Purana by Edwin F. Bryant (2017, selections of verses and commentary)
Śrīmad Bhāgavatam with the Krama-sandarbha commentary of Jīva Gosvāmī by Swami Bhānu (2019)
Bṛhad-vaiṣṇnava-toṣaṇī (Canto 10) of Sanātana Gosvāmī by Swami Bhānu (2020)
Laghu-vaiṣṇava-toṣaṇī (Canto 10) of Jīva Gosvāmī by Swami Bhānu (2020)
Śrīmad Bhāgavatam with the Vaiṣṇavānandinī commentary (Cantos 1 & 10) of Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa by Swami Bhānu (2022–23)
French
Bagavadam ou Bhagavata Purana by Maridas Poullé (1769)
Le Bhagavata Purana by Eugene Burnouf (1840)